Covid-19 has devastated refugees and asylum seekers in U.S. federal detention centers, but there has been recent cause for optimism. The Pfizer and Moderna SARS-CoV-2 vaccines have greater than 90% efficacy in preventing illness, and a federal task force has recommended prioritizing detainees for immunization. The Trump administration, however, has devised a workaround for vaccine distribution that jeopardizes the prospect of immunizing detainees, further endangering this vulnerable population.

Under the Trump administration, migrant detention centers became hot spots for infectious diseases, experiencing numerous outbreaks of influenza, measles, and mumps. Investigations into the deaths from influenza of several migrant children have revealed gross negligence in medical monitoring and a disturbing lack of expertise among people providing care to ill detainees.1 Such outcomes are unsurprising, given that detainees are held in crowded living conditions with inadequate sanitation and a limited capacity for isolation. In 2019, Customs and Border Protection (CBP) rejected a federal recommendation to vaccinate migrants against influenza, citing “logistic difficulties.”2

Although the Covid-19 pandemic has disproportionately affected migrant detainees, the U.S. government has refused to follow Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) infection-evaluation guidelines or to provide for adequate social distancing in detainment centers.3 This nonadherence has resulted in extraordinarily high SARS-CoV-2 testing positivity rates in Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) detainment facilities, which at times have exceeded 50%. By the end of August 2020, there had been more than 5000 known cases of Covid-19 in ICE detention centers.4

A working group created by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) and the CDC has developed a framework to guide the allocation of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. In phase 2, the framework prioritizes teachers and school staff, critical workers in high-risk settings, people with coexisting and underlying conditions, people in homeless shelters or group homes, older adults, and residents and staff members of detention centers, following phase 1 immunization of health care workers, nursing home residents, and people with substantial coexisting conditions.5 This prioritization acknowledges the devastation wrought by Covid-19 in vulnerable groups, including detained migrants, and the federal government’s responsibility to these people in its care.

However, federal officials from Operation Warp Speed have decided to distribute vaccines on the basis of population at the state level instead of allocation to high-risk groups. Individual states will then decide how to distribute their allotted vaccines. Without the heft of a federal mandate, this approach places the health of vulnerable communities such as refugees and asylum seekers at risk, given the crush of competing interests for the limited vaccine lots available. Although several federal entities are receiving vaccine allotments, they do not include ICE facilities. States have varied considerably in their embrace of proven public health strategies to combat the spread of the virus. Our review of state plans indicates that only one — Louisiana — explicitly mentions migrant detention centers in its vaccination priority plan.5 At least 14 states lack plans to prioritize any incarcerated populations for SARS-CoV-2 immunization.

Leaving vaccine implementation prioritization to a state decision also jeopardizes the health of migrant detainment center employees, given their close proximity to detainees. We believe an effective SARS-CoV-2 immunization strategy should immunize these employees as well as detainees, just as the CDC guidelines recommend for influenza vaccination.2

The federal government has repeatedly refused to improve living conditions and provide needed medical care to migrants held in federal facilities, denying them fundamental human rights. The incoming Biden administration has given no indication as to how it will approach such health issues facing migrant detainees, aside from indicating that any changes to immigration policies will take time. The provision of a SARS-CoV-2 vaccine is essential to provide protection against Covid-19 in one of the most vulnerable populations for which the federal government holds responsibility. Vaccinating detainees is both good medicine and a humane approach to a completely disenfranchised population. Although we urge each state to prioritize SARS-CoV-2 immunization of detained migrants, it is also the responsibility of the federal government to mandate the protection of members of this most vulnerable group by explicitly allocating vaccines for them.,Carlo Foppiano Palacios, M.D.
Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT


Mark A. Travassos, M.D.
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
